[GIS Final Presentation.pdf](https://github.com/stfran22/vacancy-blight-crime-detroit/files/6780801/GIS.Final.Presentation.pdf)
# vacancy-blight-crime-detroit

For my Fundamentals of GIS final project, I made a series of maps using ArcGIS desktop to show the links between vacancy rates, crime, and blight violations in the city of Detroit. My inspiration for exploring these relationships stems from a study conducted by [Branas et al.](https://www.pnas.org/content/115/12/2946), which concluded that when vacant lots are cleaned up and made more presentable, crime in those areas decrease. The study, carried out in Philadelphia, also found that crime did not just get pushed out to adjacent neighborhoods after the cleanups. Based on this as well as an awareness of the vacancy issues in Detroit, I decided to make maps that would show the most vulnerable neighborhoods in the city in order to target them for vacant house and lot cleanups. 

I used income and Wayne County census block group data from the US Census Bureau as well as crime, vacancy, blight violation, and data from Detroit's [open data portal](https://data.detroitmi.gov/). I gathered point shapefiles showing crime incidents, vacant houses and lots (in the form of Detroit Land Bank Authority Sales), and blight violations (a community-reported complaint on blighted vacant houses). I joined these point files to a polygon file of census block groups in Wayne County that had median income data built in. Then I generated density measures for the crime, blight violation, and vacancy data, resulting in measures showing crime incidents, blight violations, and vacancies per square mile (per block group). Finally, I made a vulnerability metric by splitting the vacancy and crime density measures and the median income into quintiles, assigning each block group a number 1 through 5 based on the quintile it belonged to (1 being the least vulnerable, 5 being the most) and multiplying the vulnerability metrics by each other. This variable allowed me to choose which block groups to target for cleanups based on their vacancy, crime, and income rates. 

I created maps showing all of the density metrics split into quintiles as well as a map showing the vacancy densities with an overlay showing the block groups that were in the highest quintile for blight violation rates. None of the metrics aligned perfectly, however there was definitely some overlap. At the time I wasn't equipped with the tools to create regression models showing relationships between the measures, although I intend to do so in a future project. I believe the maps successfully displayed the information I had pulled from the data and effectively showed target neighborhoods. I would like to explore these relationships further using Moran's I, geographically weighted regression, and other spatial statistical methods to seek out latent relationships. 

